
===== [PAGE 1] =====
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems 1196
Simon Fong
Nilanjan Dey
Amit Joshi   Editors
ICT Analysis and 
Applications
Proceedings of ICT4SD 2024, Volume 7
===== [PAGE 2] =====
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems
V olume 1196
Series Editor
Janusz Kacprzyk , Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland
Advisory Editors
Fernando Gomide, Department of Computer Engineering and Automation—DCA,
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering—FEEC, University of
Campinas—UNICAMP, São Paulo, Brazil
Okyay Kaynak, Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Bogazici University, Istanbul, Türkiye
Derong Liu, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, USA
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
Witold Pedrycz, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Alberta, Alberta, Canada
Systems Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
Marios M. Polycarpou, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
KIOS Research Center for Intelligent Systems and Networks, University of Cyprus,
Nicosia, Cyprus
Imre J. Rudas, Óbuda University, Budapest, Hungary
Jun Wang, Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong,
Kowloon, Hong Kong 
===== [PAGE 3] =====
The series “Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems” publishes the latest
developments in Networks and Systems—quickly, informally and with high quality.
Original research reported in proceedings and post-proceedings represents the core
of LNNS.
V olumes published in LNNS embrace all aspects and subﬁelds of, as well as new
challenges in, Networks and Systems.
The series contains proceedings and edited volumes in systems and networks,
spanning the areas of Cyber-Physical Systems, Autonomous Systems, Sensor
Networks, Control Systems, Energy Systems, Automotive Systems, Biological
Systems, V ehicular Networking and Connected V ehicles, Aerospace Systems,
Automation, Manufacturing, Smart Grids, Nonlinear Systems, Power Systems,
Robotics, Social Systems, Economic Systems and other. Of particular value to both
the contributors and the readership are the short publication timeframe and
the world-wide distribution and exposure which enable both a wide and rapid
dissemination of research output.
The series covers the theory, applications, and perspectives on the state of the art
and future developments relevant to systems and networks, decision making, control,
complex processes and related areas, as embedded in the ﬁelds of interdisciplinary
and applied sciences, engineering, computer science, physics, economics, social, and
life sciences, as well as the paradigms and methodologies behind them.
Indexed by SCOPUS, EI Compendex, INSPEC, WTI Frankfurt eG, zbMA TH,
SCImago.
All books published in the series are submitted for consideration in Web of Science.
For proposals from Asia please contact Aninda Bose ( aninda.bose@springer.com).

===== [PAGE 4] =====
Simon Fong · Nilanjan Dey · Amit Joshi
Editors
ICT Analysis
and Applications
Proceedings of ICT4SD 2024, V olume 7

===== [PAGE 5] =====
Editors
Simon Fong
University of Macau
Macau, China
Amit Joshi
Global Knowledge Research Foundation
Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
Nilanjan Dey
Department of Computer Science
and Engineering
Techno International New Town
Kolkata, West Bengal, India
ISSN 2367-3370 ISSN 2367-3389 (electronic)
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems
ISBN 978-981-97-9525-3 ISBN 978-981-97-9526-0 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-9526-0
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Singapore Pte Ltd. 2025
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721,
Singapore
If disposing of this product, please recycle the paper.

===== [PAGE 6] =====
Preface
Ninth International Conference on ICT for Sustainable Development (ICT4SD
2024) targets Theory, Development, Applications, Experiences and Evaluation of
Interaction Sciences with fellow students, researchers and practitioners.
The conference is devoted to increasing the understanding role of technology
issues, and how engineering has day by day evolved to prepare human-friendly
technology. The conference will provide a platform for bringing forth signiﬁcant
research and literature across the ﬁeld of ICT for sustainable development and provide
an overview of the technologies awaiting unveiling. This interaction will be the
focal point for leading experts to share their insights, provide guidance and address
participant’s questions and concerns.
The conference will be held on 8–9 August 2024 at Hotel Vivanta by TAJ,
Panaji, Goa. The conference is organized by Global Knowledge Research Foun-
dation and managed By: G R Scholastic LLP , State Chamber Partner, Goa Chamber
of Commerce and Industry, and National Chamber Partner, Knowledge Chamber of
Commerce and Industry.
Research submissions in various advanced technology areas were received after
a rigorous peer-review process with the help of program committee members and
185 external reviewers for 1900+ papers from 12 different countries out of which
358 were accepted with an acceptance ratio of 0.17. These will be presented in
38 parallel sessions in two days organized Physical at Goa and Virtual on Zoom
including 1 inaugural and 2 keynote sessions.
Technology is the driving force of progress in this era of globalization. Information
and communication technology (ICT) has become a functional requirement for the
socio-economic growth and sustained development of any country. The inﬂuence
of information communications technology (ICT) in shaping the process of glob-
alization, particularly in productivity, commercial and ﬁnancial spheres, is widely
recognized. The ICT sector is undergoing a revolution that has momentous implica-
tions for the current and future social and economic situation of all the countries in
the world. ICT plays a pivotal role in empowering people for self-efﬁcacy and how it
can facilitate this mission to reach out to grassroots level. Finally, it is concluded that
v

===== [PAGE 7] =====
vi Preface
ICT is a signiﬁcant contributor to the success of the ongoing initiative of Start-up
India.
In order to recognize and reward the extraordinary performance and achievements
by ICT and allied sectors and promote universities, researchers and students through
their research work adapt new scientiﬁc technologies and innovations. The two days
conference had presentations from the researchers, scientists, academia and students
on the research work carried out by them in different sectors.
Macau, China
Kolkata, India
Ahmedabad, India
Simon Fong
Nilanjan Dey
Amit Joshi

===== [PAGE 8] =====
Contents
Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing for Advanced Business
and Economic Research ............................................ 1
Virendra Singh Kushwah, Kamal Upreti,
Fariyah Banu Jamaluddin Saiyad, Prakash Divakaran,
V andana Mishra Chaturvedi, and Khadilkar Sujay Madhukar
Fake Signature Detection ........................................... 1 3
Juhi Nathani, Smit Madhani, Ishika Khokhani, Parag Patel,
and S. Shanthi Therese
A Framework for QoS-Driven Radar Resource Management
in V2X Communication Networks ................................... 2 3
Srinidhi S. Kulkarni, Kushal B. Kokatnur, K. Shamshuddin,
and V . B. Suneetha
Working of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) in Network
Intrusion Detection System ......................................... 3 5
Himali Gajjar and Zakiyabanu Malek
Performance Evaluation of CGLS for HMC at JSW Steel (Steel
Melting Shop) Dolvi ............................................... 4 3
Harish Harsurkar, Husain Shaikh, Abhishek Ganpat Satpute,
Bhosale Shyam Santosh, Garad Rohan Ramling,
and Garud Abhijeet Arvind
The Role of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Simulating, Automating,
and Analyzing Business Operations ................................. 5 1
Kranti Shingate, V eena Grover, Shivi Khanna, Gaurav Gupta,
Pradeep Chintale, HarshaV ardhan Nerella, C. H. V anipriya,
and Saikat Gochhait
“Virtual Assistance for Visually Impaired People” .................... 6 3
Ragho Soni, Pranav R. Nair, Anushka A. Pawar, Apeksha Jadhav,
and Gaurav Gore
vii

===== [PAGE 9] =====
viii Contents
“Utilization of Demolition Waste” ................................... 6 9
Pranesh Chawhan, Mohammad Arman Khan,
Samudre Pratik Bhagwat, and Khot Shanawaz Nadim
Construction 4.0: Leveraging IoT’s Potential in the Construction
Site .............................................................. 7 7
K. Y . Vinay, V eena Grover, Gaurav Gupta, Jitendra Sharma,
Dinesh Reddy Chittibala, Raj Mehta, and Saikat Gochhait
“Sign Language Gesture Recognition Using Machine Learning” ....... 8 9
Soni R. Ragho, Vidya R. Ghule, Gayatri S. Wasulkar,
Sanjivani M. Jadhav, and Aniket T. Ghule
Software-Driven Revolution Redeﬁning Automotive Industry .......... 9 7
Rushikesh Bhandari, Gaurav Gupta, Harsha V ardhan Sanne,
Arun Pandiyan Perumal, Anandaganesh Balakrishnan,
and Saikat Gochhait
Exploring the Consequences of Wi-Fi-Enabled Apps
Compromising Mobile Data Security ................................ 1 0 7
Apurva Kale, Gaurav Gupta, Priyanshi Sharma, Piyush Ranjan,
Dhruv Seth, and Saikat Gochhait
The Revolution of Customer Experience: Embracing the Digital
Realm ............................................................ 1 1 7
Samiksha Pedewad, Anjali Thakur, Pradeep Chintale, Gaurav Gupta,
Arun Pandiyan Perumal, and Saikat Gochhait
Bridging the Gap: Exploring Blockchain’s Role in Enhancing
Financial Inclusion in the Indian Context ............................ 1 2 9
Pradeep Chintale, Pranay Waghmare, Shivi Khanna, Ankur Mahida,
Gaurav Gupta, Shantanu Kumar, and Saikat Gochhait
Technology as an Enabler of Sustainable Smart Cities ................ 1 3 9
Naval Lawande
The Impact of External Environmental Parameters on Arecanut
Growth and Yield Production: A Quantitative Review ................ 1 5 5
S. Sushitha and K. Aparna
The Challenges in Developing Assistive Technologies
for the Hearing Impaired: Proposal for an Alternative Socially
Sustainable Approach .............................................. 1 6 7
V arghese Kandathil and Anie Mathew
Integrated Micro Pillar Microcantilever Double Square Split Ring
Resonator for Optical Sensing in Air and Water Mediums ............. 1 8 1
Afzal Shaikh, Manju Devi, Ramjan Khatik, and Shaista Shaikh

===== [PAGE 10] =====
Contents ix
Gig Economy, Analysis and Monitoring Prioritizing Privacy,
Dedication, Performance, and Accuracy ............................. 1 9 1
Anuj V erma and Devarshi Mehta
Green HRM: The Resilience Strategy for the VUCA World ............ 2 0 9
Reena Lenka and Ankita Bhatia
Addressing Gaps in Travel Booking System .......................... 2 1 9
Rishita M. Chowdary and Tarun Kumar
2D-CRYPT:Enhancing IoT Image Security with Pixel
Transposition and Chaos-Driven Substitution ........................ 2 3 3
Sachin Pujappa Baluragi, S. N. Prajwalasimha,
Aishwarya R. Waghamare, and Ashwini Jadhav
Enhancing Attendance Tracking Efﬁciency with RFID-Based
Smart Attendance Management System (SAMS) ..................... 2 4 7
Rachit Mahajan, Aryan Singhal, and Prashant V ats
Prediction of Cardiovascular Heart Disease: Unveiling Grandiose
Precision Through Opulent Classiﬁer Performance Evaluation
Using Supervised Machine Learning ................................ 2 6 1
Sonam Nagar, Karan V erma, Sachin Singh, and Kumar Shashvat
A Survey on Deep Learning and Image Processing Techniques
on Leaf Disease Detection .......................................... 2 7 5
Y udhveer Singh Moudgil and Ritika Mehra
Implementation of a Web Application for Secure File Upload
and Virus Scanning ................................................ 2 8 9
Abraham Shukla, Abhishek Ranjan, Shivakarthik S, Swati Mehta,
Akash Udaysinh Suryawanshi, and Snehal Chaudhary
Saying “no” to Silence—A Comprehensive Approach to Child
Safety Education Through Innovative Graphic Design ................ 3 0 1
Srushti Reddy and Tarun Kumar
Sustainability on Consumer Behaviour in Smart Home ............... 3 1 5
N. P . Soundarya and Tarun Kumar
Unveiling Signs: Exploring the Distinctive Rhythms of Indian Sign
Language Amidst Global Sign Variants .............................. 3 2 7
Shalini Puri, Anushka Saxena, Aamanya Shah, and Vishal Choudhary
Deep Convolutional Neural Network with Bicubic Interpolation
for Super-Resolution in Low-Resolution Images ...................... 3 3 9
Pranali Dandekar and Shailendra S. Aote
Prognostic Predictions in Lung Diseases Using Convolutional
Neural Network and Attention Mechanism .......................... 3 4 9
Vivekanand Thakare and Shailendra S. Aote

===== [PAGE 11] =====
x Contents
Self-sovereign Identity (SSI) for Data Privacy and Security
in Ubiquitous Multi-cloud Computing (UMCC): A Literature
Survey and Analysis ............................................... 3 5 9
R. Komala, B. R. Arun Kumar, and A. Shreyas
Design of Size Deduced Printed Fork Antenna For Satellite
Communication ................................................... 3 7 9
Y . Divya, Samiran Chatterjee, D. Shyam Prasad,
and Ediga Chandramohan Goud
Sneaker Resale Price Prediction Using Ensemble Learning
Techniques ........................................................ 3 9 7
Laksh Doshi, Jay Samberkar, Chaitanya Deshpande,
and Kumkum Saxena
Harnessing AI for Education and Transforming Learning ............. 4 1 1
Suruchi Pandey and Hemlata Gaikwad
Empowering Crisis Resilience: An Immersive Journey to Survival
Mastery .......................................................... 4 2 1
Amrutha Anup and Tarun Kumar
Monochrome: A Sustainably Designed Smartphone Application
for a Digital Carbon Footprint Solution .............................. 4 3 3
Prakruthi Rajendra, R. K. Sneha, Chahak Jain, and Tarun Kumar
EduVR: A Virtual Reality Tool for Intuitive Statistical Education
on Machine Learning Algorithms ................................... 4 4 5
G. Sornavalli, B. Mitul Krishna, and Mythreya Kesavan
Creating an Effectual Representation of Pedagogical Associations
for Improvement in Academic Inclusivity by Means of Machine
Learning ......................................................... 4 5 9
Supriya S. Gorde
Novel Hybrid Machine-Learning Algorithms for Resource
Optimization in Cloud ............................................. 4 7 1
Prathamesh Vijay Lahande, Parag Ravikant Kaveri,
and Jatinderkumar R. Saini
Author Index ...................................................... 4 7 9

===== [PAGE 12] =====
About the Editors
Simon Fonggraduated from La Trobe University, Australia, with a 1st Class Honours
BEng. Computer Systems degree and a Ph.D. Computer Science degree in 1993 and
1998, respectively. Simon is now working as Associate Professor at the Computer and
Information Science Department of the University of Macau. Prior to his academic
career, Simon took up various IT posts in Melbourne, Hong Kong and Singapore. Dr.
Fong has published over 396 international conference and journal papers, mostly in
the areas of data mining and metaheuristics. He is also one of the founding members
of the Data Analytics and Collaborative Computing Research Group in the Faculty
of Science and Technology.
Nilanjan Dey (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.Tech. and M.Tech. in informa-
tion technology from West Bengal Board of Technical University and Ph.D. degree in
electronics and telecommunication engineering from Jadavpur University, Kolkata,
India, in 2005, 2011 and 2015, respectively.
Currently, he is Associate Professor with the Techno International New Town,
Kolkata, and Visiting Fellow of the University of Reading, UK. He has authored
over 300 research articles in peer-reviewed journals and international conferences
and 40 authored books. His research interests include medical imaging and machine
learning. Moreover, he actively participates in program and organizing committees
for prestigious international conferences, including World Conference on Smart
Trends in Systems Security and Sustainability (WorldS4), International Congress
on Information and Communication Technology (ICICT), International Confer-
ence on Information and Communications Technology for Sustainable Development
(ICT4SD), etc.
He is also Editor-in-Chief of International Journal of Ambient Computing and
Intelligence, Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on Technology and Society
and series Co-Editor of Springer Tracts in Nature-Inspired Computing and Data-
Intensive Researchfrom Springer Nature and Advances in Ubiquitous Sensing Appli-
cations for Healthcare from Elsevier, etc. Furthermore, he was Editorial Board
Member of Complex and Intelligence Systems , Springer, Applied Soft Computing ,
xi

===== [PAGE 13] =====
xii About the Editors
Elsevier, International Journal of Information Technology , Springer, International
Journal of Information and Decision Sciences ,e t c .
Amit Joshi is currently Director of Global Knowledge Research Foundation, also
Entrepreneur and Researcher who has completed his graduation (B.Tech.) in Informa-
tion Technology and M.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering and completed
his research in the areas of cloud computing and cryptography in medical imaging
with a focus on analysis of the current government strategies and world forums
needs in different sectors on security purposes. He has an experience of around 12
years in academic and industry in prestigious organizations. He is Active Member of
ACM, IEEE, CSI, AMIE, IACSIT-Singapore, IDES, ACEEE, NPA and many other
professional societies. Currently, he is Chairman of Computer Society of India (CSI)
Udaipur Chapter and Secretary for Association of Computing Machinery (ACM)
Udaipur Professional Chapter. Further currently he is also International Chair of
InterYIT at International Federation of Information Processing (IFIP , Austria). He
has presented and published more than 50 papers in National and International Jour-
nals/Conferences of IEEE and ACM. He has also edited more than 20 books which
are published by Springer, ACM and other reputed publishers. He has also orga-
nized more than 40 National and International Conferences and Workshops through
ACM, Springer and IEEE across 5 countries including India, UK, Thailand, Europe
and USA. Apart from this academic involvement, he is also associated with the
Business and Industry Community across the globe. He is currently Director of
Emanant Tech Media (P) Limited which focuses on ICT and web-based services.
With Global Knowledge Research Foundation, his major work area is focussed on
building and making effective linkages among bureaucrats, industry associations,
academic leaders and regulatory authorities for effective connectivity for taking up
common issues related to research in different sectors, has organized more than 20
industry forum events and recognized and felicitated Awards Ceremonies through
his organizations in last 5 years. He is liaising/communicating with state as well
as central establishments along with corporate and academics to take industry and
government sector together. He is majorly focusing on academic tie-ups for medical,
engineering and management sectors, and for the same he is representing the organi-
zation in many delegations to countries including USA, UK, Canada and Israel and
visited more than 15 countries. He always looks forward and strives for networking
in various sectors with a focus on education and industry sector.

===== [PAGE 14] =====
Harnessing the Power of Cloud
Computing for Advanced Business
and Economic Research
Virendra Singh Kushwah, Kamal Upreti, Fariyah Banu Jamaluddin Saiyad,
Prakash Divakaran, Vandana Mishra Chaturvedi,
and Khadilkar Sujay Madhukar
Abstract Cloud computing has surfaced as a signiﬁcant inﬂuence in the domain
of business and economic research. Its ability to deliver vast computational
resources, scalable storage, and unparalleled accessibility has revolutionized the
way researchers analyze complex datasets, conduct simulations, and collaborate on
ground-breaking projects. This paper delves into the myriad ways cloud computing is
empowering researchers to unlock unprecedented economic insights. This research
article delves into the key dimensions of leveraging cloud computing for advanced
business and economic research. It investigates the scalability and ﬂexibility of
cloud-based infrastructure, enabling researchers to process and analyze extensive
datasets, conduct complex simulations, and implement machine learning algorithms
for predictive modeling. Moreover, the cloud facilitates real-time collaboration and
data sharing, fostering a global research community that transcends geographical
boundaries.
Keywords Cloud computing
· Business · Economic · Harnessing and big data
V . S. Kushwah
VIT Bhopal University, Sehore, Bhopal, India
e-mail: virendra.kushwah@vitbhopal.ac.in
K. Upreti (B)
Christ (Deemed to Be University) Delhi NCR Campus, Ghaziabad, India
e-mail: kamalupreti1989@gmail.com
F. B. J. Saiyad
Department of Commerce, Bath Spa University Rak, Ras Al Khaimah, UAE
P. D iva k a r a n
Himalayan University, Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh, India
V . M. Chaturvedi
D Y Patil Deemed to Be University, Vidya Nagar, Nerul, Navi Mumbai, India
e-mail: vandanamishra.c@dypatil.edu
K. S. Madhukar
KIT’s Institute of Management Education and Research, Gokul-Shirgaon, Kolhapur, Maharashtra,
India
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2025
S. Fong et al. (eds.), ICT Analysis and Applications , Lecture Notes in Networks and
Systems 1196, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-9526-0_1
1

===== [PAGE 15] =====
2 V . S. Kushwah et al.
1 Introduction
In the contemporary landscape of business and economics, the pivotal role of tech-
nology, and speciﬁcally cloud computing, cannot be overstated. The digital revolution
has ushered in a new era where data, information, and computation are seamlessly
woven into the fabric of everyday operations, generating both prospects and hurdles
for organizations across the globe. The power of cloud computing has emerged as a
transformative force, revolutionizing how businesses operate and driving economic
change on an unprecedented scale. The cloud, a metaphorical term for remote servers
connected to the Internet, has evolved from a convenient data storage and backup
solution to a dynamic and versatile platform. It offers an extensive range of services,
including infrastructure, software, and platforms, empowering businesses to leverage
advanced technologies without massive upfront investments in hardware and soft-
ware. This evolution has not only reshaped the IT landscape but has also become
a cornerstone for advanced business and economic research, enabling scholars,
analysts, and practitioners to explore the complexities of contemporary markets and
organizations in new and innovative ways.
This research explores the profound impact of cloud computing on advanced busi-
ness and economic research. It delves into the transformative potential and multi-
faceted implications of cloud technology, illustrating its ability to drive innovation,
improve efﬁciency, and reconﬁgure traditional business models. By harnessing the
capabilities of cloud computing, businesses can optimize their operations, foster
economic growth, and address emerging challenges with newfound agility. In this
paper, we begin a quest to uncover the numerous aspects of cloud computing as a cata-
lyst for advanced research in business and economics. We will examine its inﬂuence
on ﬁnancial decision-making, business strategies, economic models, and the overall
competitiveness of organizations. Our exploration encompasses a wide spectrum of
topics, from cost–beneﬁt analyses of cloud adoption to the economic consequences
of data management, regulatory compliance, and the creation of digital ecosystems.
As we venture further into the realm of cloud-based research, it is our aspiration that
this inquiry will serve as a resource for scholars, business leaders, and policymakers
seeking to navigate the dynamic intersection of cloud technology, business innova-
tion, and economic transformation. The following chapters will provide revelations
into the possibilities of cloud computing to reshape the business and economic land-
scapes, unlocking new opportunities and shedding light on challenges that demand
our collective attention and ingenuity.
Cloud computing is a swiftly advancing technology with the capability to revo-
lutionize advanced business and economic research [ 1]. By providing scalable and
affordable access to computing resources, cloud computing can enable researchers
to tackle complex problems that were previously intractable. Here are some of the
ways that cloud computing can be used to harness the power of advanced business
and economic research. Cloud computing platforms can be used to store and analyze
large datasets, which can offer valuable perspectives into business and economic
patterns. For example, researchers can use cloud computing to analyze customer

===== [PAGE 16] =====
Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing for Advanced Business … 3
data, ﬁnancial data, and market data to identify new opportunities and develop new
strategies. Cloud computing can also be used to develop and deploy machine learning
(ML) models. ML models can be employed to automate tasks, make predictions,
and identify patterns in data. For example, researchers can use machine learning
to develop models to predict customer churn, identify fraudulent transactions, and
forecast economic growth, and cloud computing can also be used to build and simu-
late economic models. Economic models can be utilized to examine the inﬂuence of
various policies and events within the economy sphere. For example, researchers can
use cloud computing to model the impact of a new tax policy on economic growth
or the impact of a natural disaster on a regional economy.
2 Background Study
In recent years, the ﬁelds of business and economics have undergone a profound trans-
formation fueled by the rapid advancement of digital technologies. This digital revo-
lution has not only generated an unprecedented volume of data but has also raised the
bar for analytical techniques and computational capabilities. As a result, researchers
and analysts face the dual challenge of managing vast datasets and harnessing the
computational power necessary to derive meaningful insights from them. Tradi-
tional research methodologies, which heavily rely on on-premises infrastructure and
limited computational resources, are often ill-equipped to meet these challenges efﬁ-
ciently. This shifting landscape has led to the emergence of cloud computing as a
game-changing tool in the arsenal of researchers in business and economics. Cloud
computing offers a paradigm shift in the way research is conducted, breaking down
traditional barriers and opening up new possibilities for scholars, economists, and
analysts alike.
“Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing for Advanced Business and
Economic Research” is a topic that aligns with the broader trends in leveraging cloud
technology for various research and analytical purposes [2]. Cloud computing offers
researchers the capacity to expand or contract their computing resources as required.
This proves to be especially advantageous for handling large datasets and complex
economic models. Researchers can access and utilize virtual machines, storage, and
processing power on-demand. Cloud computing can often be more economical than
upholding on-site infrastructure. Researchers are not required to invest in expen-
sive hardware and can solely pay for the resources they utilize, reducing overall
research costs. Cloud storage solutions allow for secure and scalable data storage.
Researchers can store and access their datasets and research materials from any
location with internet access. This facilitates cooperation and telecommuting. Cloud
platforms offer access to high-performance computing clusters, making it possible
to run complex simulations, data analysis, and econometric models more efﬁciently.
Researchers can integrate various data sources and APIs available in the cloud to
enrich their research. This includes economic data, ﬁnancial data, and other perti-
nent information that can enhance the depth and breadth of analysis. Cloud platforms

===== [PAGE 17] =====
4 V . S. Kushwah et al.
grant access to ML and AI capabilities and libraries. Researchers can use these tech-
nologies to analyze data, make predictions, and gain insights that were previously
difﬁcult to obtain [ 3]. Cloud providers allocate signiﬁcant resources toward security
measures and compliance certiﬁcations, simplifying the process for researchers to
safeguard the security and privacy of their data, which is especially important when
handling sensitive economic and business information. Cloud-based collaboration
tools enable researchers to work together on projects seamlessly. They can share
datasets, code, and results with colleagues and collaborators, fostering a more collab-
orative research environment. Cloud services can enable processing and analyzing
data in real time, allowing researchers to react quickly to changes in economic condi-
tions and business trends. Cloud providers frequently furnish backup solutions and
robust disaster recovery, ensuring that research data remains safe and accessible even
in case of unexpected incidents [ 3].
3 The Era of Big Data in Business and Economics
The era of digitalization has ushered in an era of big data in which the sheer volume,
diversity, and speed at which data is generated by businesses, consumers, and govern-
ments have reached unprecedented levels. This deluge of data encompasses a wide
array of aspects, ranging from transaction records and social networking platform
interactions to sensor data and government statistics. For researchers in business and
economics, this wealth of data represents a potential goldmine of insights, but it also
presents substantial challenges [4]. Traditionally, researchers have grappled with the
limitations of their local computing resources, struggling to process and analyze large
datasets within reasonable timeframes. Furthermore, the diversity of data sources and
formats complicates data integration and analysis. As a result, valuable insights may
remain locked away, hidden in the depths of unprocessed data. The era of big data in
business and economics has brought about a signiﬁcant transformation in how orga-
nizations conduct research and make data-driven decisions. When combined with
the power of cloud computing, it opens up new possibilities for advanced research
in these domains [ 5]. Here is a detailed look at how big data and cloud computing
intersect in business and economic research:
3.1 Big Data in Business and Economics
Big data encompasses the extensive amounts of structured and unstructured data
produced by businesses, consumers, and diverse sources. Such data comprises
customer transactions, interactions on social media, sensor data, and various other
sources. In business and economics, big data has become a valuable resource for
gaining insights into market trends, consumer behavior, supply chain optimization,
and economic forecasting. The three primary characteristics of big data are volume

===== [PAGE 18] =====
Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing for Advanced Business … 5
(substantial quantities of data), velocity (data produced rapidly), and variety (data in
diverse formats).
3.2 Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing
Cloud computing provides the infrastructure and tools necessary for storing,
processing, and analyzing big data on a large scale [5]. Cloud platforms like Amazon
Web Services (AWS), Google Cloud Platform (GCP), and Microsoft Azure offer
services speciﬁcally designed for big data analytics and storage. Cloud computing
enables businesses and researchers to access the computational resources required
for processing big data without the need for massive on-premises infrastructure
investments.
3.3 Advanced Business and Economic Research with Big
Data and Cloud Computing
Cloud storage services such as Amazon S3, Google Cloud Storage, and Azure Blob
Storage allow businesses to securely store vast amounts of data. Cloud-based data
processing frameworks like Apache Hadoop and Spark can handle the processing and
analysis of big data efﬁciently. Cloud platforms provide machine learning services
that enable researchers to develop predictive models and analyze complex datasets.
Cloud-based data streaming services facilitate real-time analytics, which is crucial
for monitoring economic indicators and business metrics as they change.
3.4 Beneﬁts of Combining Big Data and Cloud Computing
Businesses and researchers can avoid the upfront costs of infrastructure and only
pay for the resources they utilize. Cloud resources can handle growing datasets and
computational needs. Researchers can collaborate on projects regardless of their
physical location. Cloud computing facilitates quicker data processing and enabling
real-time decision-making.
3.5 Real-World Applications
In economics, big data and cloud computing have been used to analyze consumer
sentiment on social media, track economic indicators, and forecast market trends. In

===== [PAGE 19] =====
6 V . S. Kushwah et al.
business, organizations use these technologies for customer segmentation, demand
forecasting, fraud detection, and supply chain optimization.
3.6 Future Trends
As big data continues to grow, businesses and researchers will rely more on cloud
computing to harness its potential. Advances in AI and ML will further improve the
analysis of big data for economic and business insights.
4 Literature Review
4.1 Cloud Computing in Research
The integration of cloud computing in research spanning various disciplines has
garnered growing attention in recent years. Researchers have acknowledged the
potential of cloud-based resources in overcoming computational limitations and
improving research efﬁciency. In the realm of economics and business, this shift
is particularly signiﬁcant due to the data-intensive nature of these ﬁelds.
Key cloud service providers, such as Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and
Google Cloud, have been instrumental in shaping the cloud computing landscape.
Researchers have evaluated their offerings, pricing models, and the competitive
dynamics of the cloud market [ 6]. The ﬁeld of cloud computing continues to evolve
rapidly. Emerging trends include edge computing, which extends cloud capabilities
to the network edge, and serverless computing, a paradigm that abstracts infrastruc-
ture management [ 7]. Additionally, cloud-native technologies, such as containers
and Kubernetes, are gaining traction [ 8].
4.2 Cloud-Based Data Analysis
Cloud computing has also ushered in a new era of data analysis in business and
economics. Researchers are no longer bound by the limitations of local computing
resources. Chen et al. [9] demonstrated how cloud-based platforms allow for efﬁcient
data integration from various sources, streamlining the data pre-processing stage a
critical step in economic research. The cloud’s extensive libraries of analytical tools
and pre-conﬁgured environments have been praised for their role in simplifying the
analysis process Liu et al. [ 10].
Furthermore, cloud platforms have opened doors to the implementation of
advanced analytical techniques, including machine learning and predictive modeling.

===== [PAGE 20] =====
Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing for Advanced Business … 7
Gupta and Kumar [ 11] showcased how cloud-based machine learning models can
enhance the accuracy of economic forecasts, while Brown and Miller [12] illustrated
the power of cloud-based simulations in modeling economic scenarios.
4.3 Collaborative Research and Global Networking
In an increasingly interconnected world, collaboration and data sharing have become
integral to research endeavors. Cloud computing facilitates collaborative research
efforts on a global scale. Researchers from different geographical locations can
simultaneously access and work on the same datasets by Kim et al. [ 13]. This global
networking fosters the exchange of ideas and methodologies, contributing to the
advancement of economic and business research.
4.4 Challenges and Concerns
While cloud computing provides numerous beneﬁts, it is essential to acknowledge
the linked challenges and concerns. Data privacy and security have been the subjects
of signiﬁcant scrutiny by Wu et al. [ 14]. Researchers and institutions need to imple-
ment strong security measures to safeguard sensitive economic data stored in the
cloud environment. Cost management is another critical consideration. Garcia and
Martinez [ 15] emphasized the importance of optimizing cloud resource allocation
to control expenses effectively. Ensuring compliance with regulatory frameworks,
such as GDPR and HIPAA, is paramount for researchers working with sensitive
data. The emergence of big data has transformed the manner in which businesses
and economies operate, generating a wealth of information that holds the key to
unlocking valuable economic insights. However, extracting meaningful insights from
these massive datasets requires sophisticated analytical tools and techniques. Cloud
computing provides a robust platform for big data analytics, empowering researchers
to leverage the potential of tools like Hadoop and Spark to process and analyze large-
scale datasets. This empowers researchers to identify patterns, trends, and anomalies
that were previously hidden within the vast troves of economic data as shown in
Fig. 1.
A study by Chen and Zhang [16] demonstrates the effectiveness of cloud-based big
data analytics in economic research, showcasing its ability to uncover perspectives
into consumer behavior, market patterns, and economic forecasting. Similarly, a
paper by V arian [17] highlights the potential of analytics on big data to revolutionize
economic research, enabling researchers to attain a deeper comprehension of intricate
economic phenomena. Economic research often beneﬁts from collaboration among
researchers from diverse backgrounds and expertise. Cloud-based platforms provide
a collaborative environment where researchers can share data, models, and insights
seamlessly, regardless of their geographical location. This fosters a global research

===== [PAGE 21] =====
8 V . S. Kushwah et al.
Fig. 1 Cloud infrastructure service market
community, enabling researchers to work together on complex projects, exchange
ideas, and accelerate the pace of discovery.
A study by Borgman [ 18] emphasizes the role of cloud computing in facilitating
collaboration among researchers, highlighting its ability to overcome geographical
barriers and promote the exchange of knowledge. Similarly, a paper by Foster and
Kesselman (2004) discusses the potential of cloud computing to create a “virtual
laboratory” for economic research, enabling researchers to collaborate on projects
remotely and share resources effectively. The cost of acquiring and maintaining
high-performance computing infrastructure can be prohibitive for many researchers,
particularly those in developing countries or smaller institutions. Cloud computing
democratizes access to these resources, providing researchers with affordable and on-
demand access to cutting-edge research tools and platforms. This enables a broader
range of researchers to contribute to the advancement of economic knowledge,
fostering a more inclusive and diverse research landscape.
A study by V arian [19] highlights the potential of cloud computing to democratize
access to research tools, enabling researchers from all backgrounds to participate in
cutting-edge research. Similarly, a paper by Baker [ 20] discusses the role of cloud
computing in leveling the playing ﬁeld for economic research, providing researchers
in developing countries with access to the same resources as their counterparts in
developed nations as shown in Fig. 2.
5 Impact on Industries
IT and Software Development: Cloud computing has transformed the way soft-
ware is developed, tested, and deployed. Developers can leverage cloud-based plat-
forms and services to build, host, and scale applications quickly. This acceler-
ates the development lifecycle and reduces time-to-market for new software solu-
tions. Cloud computing enables organizations to streamline their business operations
by adopting cloud-based solutions for customer relationship management (CRM),
human resources (HR), enterprise resource planning (ERP), and other core functions.
This enhances efﬁciency, collaboration, and data accessibility. Cloud computing

===== [PAGE 22] =====
Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing for Advanced Business … 9
Fig. 2 Issues or challenges in cloud computing
furnishes the storage capabilities and computational power needed for big data
processing and analytics. Companies can utilize cloud-based analytics platforms to
extract valuable perspectives from extensive datasets, enabling data-driven decision-
making and business intelligence. Cloud computing has empowered e-commerce
businesses by providing scalable infrastructure to handle high web trafﬁc, process
transactions securely, and store customer data. Online services such as streaming
platforms, social media, and collaboration tools rely on cloud computing to deliver
seamless user experiences. Cloud computing plays a crucial role in processing and
managing the massive volumes of information generated by IoT devices. Cloud-
based IoT platforms enable the collection, storage, analysis, and integration of IoT
data, facilitating real-time monitoring, predictive analytics, and automation as shown
in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3 Impact on cloud-based industries

===== [PAGE 23] =====
10 V . S. Kushwah et al.
6 Examples of Cloud Computing-Powered Research
Projects
Cloud computing employed in banks provides signiﬁcant beneﬁts for the industry and
facilitates tailored solutions for banking operations. It integrates the digital assets of
the sector, such as software platforms and data algorithms, and adapts them to fulﬁll
the distinct needs of banking systems. Below are several speciﬁc instances demon-
strating the utilization of cloud computing for advanced business and economic
research. The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis uses cloud computing to run its
FRED-MD model, which is a large-scale macroeconomic model of the US economy.
The FRED-MD model is employed by researchers and policymakers to scrutinize
the impacts of economic policies and to forecast future economic performance. At
the heart of changes in ﬁnancial services, offerings is computing power, including
cloud computing, data aggregation, and artiﬁcial intelligence [ 21]. The University
of Chicago Booth School of Business uses cloud computing to power its global
economic dynamics (GED) model. The GED model is a global macroeconomic
model that is used by researchers to examine the interactions between different
economies around the world [ 22]. The World Bank uses cloud computing to store
and analyze large datasets on poverty, inequality, and other economic development
indicators. The World Bank uses this data to inform its research and to develop
policies and programs to promote economic development [ 23].
7 Applications of Cloud Computing in the Banking Sector
Innovation and technological progress fuel competition and risks in the banking
industry. Let us delve into the real-time applications of cloud computing. Firstly,
Fraud Detection & Prevention: This entails easily identifying and preventing fraudu-
lent activities at an accelerated pace. Financial institutions establish their cloud infras-
tructure to analyze large volumes of accumulated data from diverse sources, enabling
them to detect fraud and address suspicious behavior promptly, thus averting poten-
tial harm. Secondly, Data Analysis: This aids in comprehending speciﬁc patterns
and staying updated on the latest patterns and trends in customer behavior. Such
detailed analysis empowers banks to precisely forecast how customers engage with
and respond to ﬁnancial products. Consequently, it propels banks to devise inno-
vative solutions to meet customer requirements and demands more effectively than
ever before. Thirdly, banks utilize customer relationship management (CRM) in
cloud computing to manage their client interactions and data. This enables the ﬁnan-
cial sector to monitor every interaction regardless of timing or location. Opting
for the appropriate cloud computing approach for banks facilitates the delivery of
personalized services based on clients’ preferences.

===== [PAGE 24] =====
Harnessing the Power of Cloud Computing for Advanced Business … 11
8 Conclusion
Cloud computing has revolutionized the ﬁeld of business and economic research,
providing researchers with the tools and resources to tackle complex economic
problems, analyze vast datasets, and collaborate globally. As cloud technologies
continue to evolve, their impact on economic research is poised to grow even more
profound, leading to deeper insights into economic phenomena and driving informed
decision-making. Cloud computing is ushering in a new era of economic enlight-
enment, empowering researchers to unlock the secrets of the global economy and
shape a more prosperous future. The integration of cloud computing in business and
economic research represents a transformative shift with signiﬁcant implications.
References
1. Upreti, K Parashar J, Kushwah V Khatri V Kumar N, Khan M (2024) A comparative study:
fog and cloud computing a comparative study: fog and cloud computing
2. Khan M (2023) Cloud-based ﬁnancial services: innovations in banking and investment
3. Aslam F (2023) Unleashing the power of cloud computing for big data management:
advantages, challenges, and future prospects. Asian J. Res. Com. Sci 16(3):290–295
4. Obschonka M, Audretsch DB (2020) Artiﬁcial intelligence and big data in entrepreneurship:
a new era has begun. Small Bus Econ 55:529–539
5. Ciampi F, Demi S, Magrini A, Marzi G, Papa A (2021) Exploring the impact of big data
analytics capabilities on business model innovation: The mediating role of entrepreneurial
orientation. J Bus Res 123:1–13
6. Forrester Research (2021) The forrester wave™: public cloud development and infrastructure
platforms, Q2 2021
7. Levine S, Redman T, Mietus N (2019) Serverless computing: current trends and open problems.
ACM Digital Library. DOI 10(1145/3293611):3331634
8. Berg D (2015) Cloud native computing: an interview with kubernetes’ Brendan Burns
9. Chen HM, Chang KC, Lin TH (2016) A cloud-based system framework for performing online
viewing, storage, and analysis on big data of massive BIMs, Automation in Construction,
71(1):34–48, ISSN 0926–5805, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2016.03.002
10. Liu L, Lu C, Xiao F, Liu R, Xiong NN (2021) A practical, integrated multi-criteria decision-
making scheme for choosing cloud services in cloud systems. IEEE Access 9:88391–88404.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3089991
11. Gupta R, Tanwar S, Tyagi S, Kumar N (2020) Machine learning models for secure data analytics:
A taxonomy and threat model. Comput Commun 153:406–440
12. Gupta S, Modgil S, Kumar, Sivarajah U, Irani Z (2022) Artiﬁcial intelligence and cloud-based
collaborative platforms for managing disaster, extreme weather and emergency operations, Int.
J. Prod. Econ. 254:108642 ISSN 0925–5273 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2022.108642
13. Kim Y , Lui SS (2015) The impacts of external network and business group on innovation: Do
the types of innovation matter? J. Bus. Res. 68(9):1964–1973
14. Wu H, Dwivedi AD, Srivastava G (2021) Security and privacy of patient information in
medical systems based on blockchain technology. ACM transactions on multimedia computing,
communications, and applications (TOMM) 17(2s):1–17
15. Alonso J et al. (2021) Optimization and prediction techniques for self-healing and self-learning
applications in a trustworthy cloud continuum. Information 12(8):308
16. Y ang C et al. (2014) A spatiotemporal compression-based approach for efﬁcient big data
processing on cloud. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 80(8):1563–1583

===== [PAGE 25] =====
12 V . S. Kushwah et al.
17. V arian HR (2014) Big Data: New Tricks for Econometrics. J. Econ. Perspect. 28(2):3–28.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.28.2.3
18. Borgman CL (2010) Research data: who will share what, with whom, when, and why? (RatSWD
Working paper series, 161). Berlin: Rat für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsdaten (RatSWD). https://
nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-415626
19. V arian HR (2010) Computer mediated transactions. American Econ. Rev. 100(2):1–10
20. Baker J (2012) The technology–organization–environment framework. Information systems
theory: explaining and predicting our digital society 1:231–245
21. Upreti K, Arora S, Sharma AK, Pandey AK, Sharma KK Dayal M (2023) Wave height fore-
casting over ocean of things based on machine learning techniques: an application for ocean
renewable energy generation. IEEE J Oceanic Eng.https://doi.org/10.1109/JOE.2023.3314090
22. Kannan N, Upreti K, Pradhan R, Dhingra M, Kalimuthukumar S, Mahaveerakannan
R, Gayathri R (2023) Future perspectives on new innovative technologies compar-
ison against hybrid renewable energy systems. Comput Electr Eng 111:108910, Part A.
ISSN 00457906. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2023.108910.https://www.sciencedi
rect.com/science/article/pii/S0045790623003348
23. https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/837891494407497011/pdf/114837-WP-Clo
udOverview-PUBLIC.pdf.

===== [PAGE 26] =====
Fake Signature Detection
Juhi Nathani , Smit Madhani, Ishika Khokhani, Parag Patel,
and S. Shanthi Therese
Abstract Forgery of signatures remains a prevalent issue in various sectors such
as banking, legal, and governmental agencies, leading to signiﬁcant ﬁnancial losses
and legal complications. Many properties of a signature may vary even when two
signatures are made by same person. So, detecting a forgery becomes a challenging
task. Hence, the proposed solution detects fake signatures using VGG-16 for prop-
erties extraction and convolution neural network for signature veriﬁcation process,
thus building an automated system which accurately detects whether a handwritten
signature is real or forged.
Keywords Convolution neural network
· VGG-16 · Feature extraction · Signature
veriﬁcation
1 Introduction
Signature authentication plays a pivotal role in ensuring the security and integrity
of various transactions and documents. As the digital landscape expands, the risk of
fraudulent activities involving fake signatures has also increased. Detecting forged
signatures is a challenging task that demands robust and accurate solutions. In this
context, our research focuses on the development of an advanced fake signature
detection system leveraging deep learning techniques.
The initial attempt to address this issue involved a generative adversarial network
(GAN)-based model. However, despite its potential, the GAN model exhibited a
suboptimal accuracy of 50%, prompting the need for a more effective approach.
Recognizing the signiﬁcance of accurate feature extraction and classiﬁcation in signa-
ture detection, we transitioned to a model that combines the power of VGG16 and
convolutional neural networks (CNN).
J. Nathani (B) · S. Madhani · I. Khokhani · P. P a t e l· S. S. Therese
Department of Information Technology, Thadomal Shahani Engineering College, Afﬁliatedto
University of Mumbai, Mumbai, India
e-mail: juhi.nathani@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2025
S. Fong et al. (eds.), ICT Analysis and Applications , Lecture Notes in Networks and
Systems 1196, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97-9526-0_2
13

===== [PAGE 27] =====
1 4 J .N a t h a n ie ta l .
The decision to employ VGG16 stems from its proven success in image feature
extraction tasks, while the CNN architecture serves as an adept classiﬁer. This hybrid
model aims to synergize the strengths of both components, providing a robust and
accurate solution for fake signature detection.
This paper delves into the comprehensive methodology employed, detailing the
datasets used, the model architecture, and the training process. By utilizing the
STCET dataset from Kaggle and a bespoke dataset curated in-house, we ensure diver-
sity and real-world relevance in our training data. Our model achieves a commendable
accuracy of approximately 99%, surpassing the limitations of the earlier GAN-based
approach and even the standalone VGG16 model. In essence, this research not only
contributes to the realm of signature detection but also underscores the importance
of selecting appropriate architectures for speciﬁc tasks within the broader domain
of deep learning. The subsequent sections provide an in-depth exploration of our
methodology, experimental results, and discussions, shedding light on the nuances
of our approach and its implications in the ﬁeld of signature authentication.
2 Review of Literature
Detection of forged signatures is not a new thought, it has been in works since
many years and a large number of techniques have been experimented with to
solve the problem. In the domain of signature veriﬁcation, the utilization of deep
learning models, particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and architec-
tures like VGG-16, has emerged as a forefront methodology due to their proﬁciency
in feature extraction and pattern recognition. Studies such as [1] have long established
the complexity of signature veriﬁcation as a task that requires acute differentiation
between genuine and forged signatures, highlighting the necessity for models that
can learn and identify nuanced patterns. Recent advancements, as discussed by [ 1],
demonstrate how deep learning architectures, especially CNNs, have signiﬁcantly
outperformed traditional machine learning approaches in this ﬁeld. These models
excel in automatically extracting discriminative features from signatures, which are
crucial for effective veriﬁcation. Furthermore, the work by [ 2] successfully applied
VGG-16 for feature extraction in signature veriﬁcation, showcasing its capability to
capture intricate details and variations in handwritten signatures, thereby laying the
groundwork for its application in enhancing the accuracy of signature veriﬁcation
systems.
Moreover, the exploration of generative adversarial networks (GANs) in gener-
ating synthetic forgeries has introduced a novel approach to training signature veri-
ﬁcation models, as indicated by research from [ 3]. This method not only enriches
the dataset but also challenges the veriﬁcation system with high-quality forgeries,
pushing the boundaries of what these models can recognize and differentiate. Despite
the promising results of CNN and VGG-16 in feature extraction and classiﬁcation
tasks, the integration of these models into a cohesive system that maintains high

===== [PAGE 28] =====
Fake Signature Detection 15
accuracy and efﬁciency in real-world applications remains an area ripe for explo-
ration. As evidenced by the work of [4], combining deep learning models with robust
datasets and innovative training techniques can lead to signiﬁcant improvements in
the performance.
3 Proposed System
3.1 Pre-Processing and F eature Extraction:
The VGG-16 architecture is a convolutional neural network (CNN) consisting of
16 layers, including convolutional layers, max-pooling layers, and fully connected
layers. The VGG-16 architecture is a widely recognized convolutional neural network
(CNN) comprised of 16 layers, renowned for its simplicity and effectiveness in
various computer vision tasks. Its structure consists of a series of convolutional
blocks, each containing multiple convolutional layers followed by rectiﬁed linear
unit (ReLU) activation functions, which progressively extract intricate features from
input images. The network also incorporates max-pooling layers after each set of
convolutional layers to reduce spatial dimensions and computational complexity
while ensuring translational invariance. Towards the end of the network, three
fully connected layers combine the high-level features learned by the preceding
layers, culminating in a softmax layer that outputs probability distributions over
different classes, facilitating classiﬁcation tasks. Despite its straightforward archi-
tecture compared to more modern designs, VGG-16’s depth and layer conﬁguration
have made it a prevalent choice and a robust baseline in the ﬁeld of computer vision.
Before feeding the signature images into the VGG-16 network, pre-processing steps
are applied to enhance the quality and standardize the input. This could involve
resizing the images to a consistent resolution, normalizing pixel values, and poten-
tially applying contrast enhancement or noise reduction techniques to improve the
clarity of the signatures.
VGG-16 is employed as a feature extractor in a transfer learning set-up. Transfer
learning involves leveraging a pre-trained CNN model (like VGG-16) that has been
trained on a large dataset (e.g. ImageNet) to extract features relevant to a new task—
in this case, distinguishing between genuine and forged signatures. The layers of
the VGG-16 network serve as feature extractors, capturing low-level to high-level
visual features that are useful for discrimination. Depending on the speciﬁcs of the
handwritten signature detection task, ﬁne-tuning may be performed on the pre-trained
VGG-16 network. This involves training the network on a smaller dataset of genuine
and forged signatures to adapt its learned features to the new task. Alternatively,
feature fusion techniques may be applied, where features extracted from the VGG-16
network are combined with features extracted from other sources, such as handcrafted

===== [PAGE 29] =====
1 6 J .N a t h a n ie ta l .
Fig. 1 (This ﬁgure depicts the block diagram for the veriﬁcation process, wherein a signature is
taken input in form of image (jpg/png).In the next step, feature extraction is done using VGG-16,
and CNN is then used for veriﬁcation. The ﬁnal output is a classiﬁed signature depicting whether
it is real or fake)
features or features from other pre-trained networks. The features extracted by VGG-
16 typically represent different aspects of the signature images, including shapes,
textures, patterns, and spatial arrangements of pixels. These features capture both
local and global characteristics of the signatures, enabling the detection system to
discern subtle differences between genuine and forged signatures (Fig. 1)
3.2 3.2. V eriﬁcation
In a fake signature detection system project that utilizes VGG-16 for feature extrac-
tion and a CNN for signature veriﬁcation, the convolutional neural network (CNN)
plays a critical role in the ﬁnal classiﬁcation decision of whether a signature is forged
or real.
The CNN architecture used for signature veriﬁcation in the aforementioned
fake signature detection system typically comprises multiple convolutional layers
followed by max-pooling layers for feature extraction, followed by fully connected
layers for classiﬁcation. The convolutional layers apply ﬁlters to the input feature
maps, extracting hierarchical representations of the signature images. Max-pooling
layers then reduce spatial dimensions, enhancing computational efﬁciency and trans-
lational invariance. Finally, fully connected layers combine the extracted features
and perform classiﬁcation, with the last layer often employing a softmax activation
function to output probabilities for different classes (e.g. genuine or forged). Through
training on labelled data, the CNN learns to differentiate between genuine and forged
signatures based on the learned features, ultimately enabling accurate veriﬁcation of
handwritten signatures.
Following feature extraction, the feature representations obtained from VGG-16
are fed into a CNN speciﬁcally designed for signature veriﬁcation. This CNN is
trained to learn the complex relationships between the extracted features and the
authenticity of the signatures. Through a process of supervised learning, the CNN
adjusts its parameters to optimize its ability to differentiate between genuine and
forged signatures based on the learned features.

===== [PAGE 30] =====
Fake Signature Detection 17
Fig. 2 Architecture of the proposed system
The CNN outputs a probability score or a binary classiﬁcation (real or forged) for
each input signature based on its learned representations. By analysing the extracted
features and comparing them against learned patterns of genuine signatures, the
CNN makes a decision regarding the authenticity of the signature. The CNN is
trained on a labelled dataset comprising genuine and forged signatures, where it
learns to generalize from the provided examples and distinguish between different
classes. Additionally, ﬁne-tuning techniques may be applied to adapt the CNN’s
learned representations to the speciﬁc characteristics of the signature dataset, further
enhancing its performance (Fig. 2)
3.3 3.3. Architecture
4 Experiment and Result Analysis
In this section, we present the datasets and the experimental set-ups. Then, we will
give information about the implementation details (Table 1)
Initially, our project strategy involved leveraging generative adversarial networks
(GANs) for implementation. To this end, we meticulously trained a GAN model
Table 1 Accuracy obtained
on different models Model Accurancy (%)
GAN model 50
VGG-16 model 55.8
(CNN + VGG-16)model 96
